### Description

In some places in the traditional Hebrew text of the Bible, there are words or phrases that later scribes and translators have thought to be unacceptable in some way. Sometimes it seems that the earlier scribe made an error while copying the text. In other cases, a later scribe wanted to update the spelling, grammar, or vocabulary, or he wanted to replace objectionable words with something more acceptable. In many cases, the later scribes put notes in the margin that tell people who are reading the Scriptures out loud to say something different from what is in the written text. Scribes developed this system both to preserve wording that they thought might be original and to encourage readers to speak a more acceptable or understandable word or phrase. 



### Reasons This Is a Translation Issue

In order to make the best translation possible, translators need to know what is the best source text for their translation. Wherever there may be errors or problems in the source text, they need to know what both ancient scribes and modern scholars consider to be the most likely solution to that problem that best represents what the original text said. 



### Examples from the Bible

> **when** they spoke to him day after day, he did not listen to them. (Esther 3:4 text)



In the margin of the Hebrew text, a scribe has suggested a different word:



> **as** they spoke to him day after day, he did not listen to them. (Esther 3:4 margin)



In the following examples of the Hebrew text from Ruth, Naomi is speaking to Ruth about visiting Boaz at the threshing floor. In the Hebrew text, Naomi speaks as though she were doing these actions herself. This may be because the child that will be born to Ruth and Boaz will be considered to belong to Naomi (Ruth 4:16-17). But to avoid confusion, a scribe made a note in the margin to read the text as instructions to Ruth:  

> **I will go down** to the threshing floor (Ruth 3:3 text)



> **go down** to the threshing floor (Ruth 3:3 margin)



> Then go and uncover his feet **and I will lie down** (Ruth 3:4 text)



> Then go and uncover his feet **and lie down** (Ruth 3:4 margin)



In the following examples, it seems that the Hebrew scribe skipped over the numbers. They can be supplied, however, from some manuscripts of the ancient Greek translation: 



> Saul {was} a son of **a year** in his becoming king, and he reigned over Israel **two years**. (1 Sam 13:1 ULT)



> Saul {was} a son of **thirty years** in his becoming king, and he reigned over Israel **forty-two years**. (ancient Greek translation)



In Psalm 103:5, the word “ornaments” does not seem to make any sense. It seems that the scribe mistook it for a similar word that means “existence.” Modern scholars propose using that other word instead:



> The one satisfying your **ornaments** with good; (Psalm 103:5 ULT)



> The one satisfying your **existence** with good; (proposed alternate reading)



### Translation Strategies

•	Decide which reading to follow: Discuss as a team whether you will translate the written text or translate the reading that marginal notes or modern scholars suggest. It may be best to decide this on a case-by-case basis. If a translation of the Bible already exists in your region and the readers of your translation will be familiar with it, consider using the readings that it translates.

•	Use footnotes for significant differences: If the written text and the marginal or suggested text have different meanings or implications that could affect readers’ understanding of the text, provide a footnote to explain both readings. 

•	Consider how your translation will sound when read aloud: Even if you decide generally to translate the written text, you may wish to follow the marginal instructions and substitute different language when the written text uses words that might not be appropriate for public reading. You can put the reading of the written text in a footnote.

•	Consult church communities and leaders for difficult cases: For readings that may be controversial or theologically sensitive, discuss options with church communities and leaders as part of the translation-checking process.



### Examples of Translation Strategies Applied

(Ruth 3:4) Then go and uncover his feet and lie down^1^

^1^From the marginal reading. The Hebrew says, “…and I will lie down.”



(1 Samuel 13:1) Saul {was} a son of thirty years in his becoming king, and he reigned over Israel forty-two years.^2^ 

^2^From the ancient Greek translation. The Hebrew says, “Saul {was} a son of a year in his becoming king, and he reigned over Israel two years.”

(Psalm 103:5) The one satisfying your ornaments with good;^3^ 

^3^The original reading may have been, “The one satisfying your existence with good;”

 

### This page answers the question:

Why does the ULT have some different readings from other Bible translations?

In order to understand this topic, it would be good to read:

•	Textual Variants (How to handle differences between manuscripts)

•	Create Accurate Translations (Ensuring the meaning is faithfully communicated)

•	Create Church-Approved Translations (Involving church networks in the translation process)

 

### Next we recommend you learn about:

•	Create Authoritative Translations
